---
published: true
layout: post
slug: "seaweed"
category: engineering
author: peter

---

This paper reviews work on the anaerobic digestion of biomass to create
biogas. In particular it looks at the use of marine sources of biomass -
seaweed or macroalgae. Seaweed is seen as superior to other crops as an
energy source as it does not compete with arable land for food
production purposes. Many species of seaweed and macroalge can be
anaerobically digested to create biogas. The level of gas produced
compares favourably with other common sources for digestion. The bigoas
can be burned in CHP plants or upgraded to biomethane and added to
existing natural gas grids or used as a transport fuel. Seaweed can be
harvested from the wild or cultivated in farms. As an island nation,
Ireland has the potential to produce large quantities of seaweed. With
the current price of oil, the price of producing biogas from seaweed may
not be economically viable.

Introduction
============

Methane is the main component of natural gas - one of the most common
and useful fuel sources currently available. Methane can be burned in
gas turbines to create electricity or used as a transport fuel. It is
estimated that a mature biogas industry could satisfy 10% of Ireland’s
energy in transport requirements [1][1].

Methane can be found in it’s natural state in underground in gas
deposits. It is extracted and purified, and typically distributed by
pipeline. The existing gas distribution grid and gas consumption
technologies are major assets and have a significant role to play in the
future world energy scenario.

Burning methane releases carbon dioxide. Although the level of released
by burning methane is significantly less than the levels released from
coal and oil, it still contributes to global warming. Like other fossil
fuels, the deposits of natural gas are finite. If alternative,
renewable, carbon neutral sources of methane can be developed, the
existing infrastructure could be used to distribute and consume the gas.

One such alternative source is anaerobic digestion - the breakdown of
organic matter in an oxygen free environment. Many sources of organic
material can be processed in an anaerobic digester, including grass,
food waste, manure and slaughterhouse waste. Another potential source of
organic matter is seaweed or macroalgae.

Anaerobic Digestion
===================

A review of the chemistry and microbiology of the anaerobic digestion
process is outside the scope of this review, but the process can be
summarised as follows: “During the process of anaerobic digestion
organic raw materials are converted to biogas, a mixture of carbon
dioxide and methane with traces of other constituents, by a consortium
of bacteria which are sensitive to or completely inhibited by oxygen”
[8][8] The organic substrate matter is biochemically
digested by bacteria. This process produces a quantity of methane and
carbon dioxide, along with smaller quantities of other gases. The
proportion of to depends on the original organic matter. The process
also results in an effluent by-product of materials that cannot be
digested. This effluent is high in nitrogen and can be used as a
fertilizer.

The level of methane produced from a substrate is generally reported in
terms of litres of methane per kilogram of volatile solid (L CH4/kg VS). For
comparison, *Chynoweth et al.* [2][2] have studied a
number of different substrates including seaweeds, grasses and municipal
waste. See table [substrates] for the results:


<table class="table">
  <thead>
    <tr>
      <th>Substrate</th>
      <th>L CH4/kg VS</th>
      <tr>
      </thead>
      <tbody>
        <td>Macrocystis seaweed (Giant Kelp)</td><td>410</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>Laminaria seaweed               </td><td>280</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>Sargassum seaweed               </td><td>380</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>Sorghum grass                   </td><td>390</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>Napiergrass (Elephant Grass)    </td><td>340</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>Poplar wood                     </td><td>320</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>Water hyacinth                  </td><td>320</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>Sugarcane                       </td><td>300</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>Willow                          </td><td>300</td>
      </tr>
      <tr>
        <td>Municipal solid waste           </td><td>220</td>
      </tr>
    </tbody>
  </table>



  : Range of biochemical methane potential data for biomass or waste
  feedstocks [2][2]<span
  data-label="substrates"></span>

  Anaerobic Digestion of Seaweed
  ==============================

  As seen in Table [substrates], some types of seaweed can produce levels
  of methane that compare well against other substrates commonly used such
  as municipal waste and grasses.

  The level of methane produced varies widely between different studies.
  Comparisons across studies can be difficult, as the methodology used can
  vary considerably.

  *Vanegas and Bartlett* [3][3] studied five species of
  seaweed found in Irish waters, co-digesting them with bovine slurry in
  small batches of 1L or less. The methane produced varied by 55%.
  *Saccharina latissima* performed best while *Ulva* performed worst. All
  produced worthwhile levels of methane except *Fucus serratus*, which did
  not produce enough methane to be worth studying further.

  The levels reported for the same seaweed species can also vary
  considerably between studies. A number of papers studied *Ulva* or sea
  lettuce. The maximum level of methane reported from *Ulva* was 480 CH4/ kg
  VS while the lowest level was 162 CH4/ kg VS [4][4].
  *McKennedy and Sherlock* find that the methodology behind these studies
  varies. In some studies, the seaweed is preprocessed. The preprocessing
  can include washing, drying or chopping to a uniform size. *Allen et
  al.* [5][5] found that washed and dried *Ulva* had a
  higher biomethane potential than fresh, wilted or unwashed samples.
  Preprocessing increases the parasitic energy requirement for the
  process.

  Some studies use an active reactor, while others start a new process.
  Some studies [3][3] co-digest seaweed with bovine slurry.

  Seaweed Resource
  ================

  One of the main advantages of using seaweed rather than other crops as a
  source for biomethane from anaerobic digestion is that it does not use
  land needed for food production. The seaweed resource can be harvested
  from the wild or cultivated in farms.

  Wild Harvesting
  ---------------

  Some species of seaweed are problematic in seas and on beaches. An
  abundance of *Ulva lactuca* or sea lettuce can be caused by
  eutrophication of water by excess nitrogen. This phenomena is commonly
  known as a *Green Tide*. The excess seaweed typically washes up on
  beaches and rots, causing bad smells. The use of this nuisance resource
  was studied to assess the potential of using it to generate methane from
  anaerobic digestion [5][5]. It was found to be a viable
  resource with a significant methane yield of 250 L CH4 /kg VS.

  *Allen et al.* [5][5] also studied the co-digestion of
  *Ulva lactuca* with manure slurry. A number of positive affects were
  noted, including a 17% increase in biomethane production when compared
  to mono-digestion of the substrates.

  Interestingly, the level of biomethane produced from manure slurry
  depends on the time of year. *Allen et al.* [5][5] found
  that yields from bovine slurry is higher during the winter. *Ulva
  lactuca* could be harvested when plentiful, stored and used in the
  digester when manure slurry is of lower quality for biomethane
  production.

  The Irish Environmental Protection Agency [6][6] has identified 7
  eutrophic sites around the country that experience ‘elevated nutrient
  concentrations’ and ‘accelerated growth of plants’. There were a further
  9 sites identified as potentially eutrophic. These sites are likely to
  have a high level of *Ulva lactuca* that could be harvested for
  anaerobic digestion. *Allen et al.* [5][5] estimate that
  the biomethane resource available from one of these sites could power
  264 cars, each travelling 15,000 km per annum.

  Cultivation
  -----------

  Other studies do not consider the harvesting of wild seaweeds as a
  viable option for biofuel production. *Hughes et al.* state that ‘it
  would be impossible to justify harvest on the massive scale necessary to
  make a significant energy contribution’ due to the potential yield and
  environmental impacts associated [7][7]. Instead they
  suggest cultivation of seaweed.

  The farming of marine algae is well developed in Asia but in it’s
  infancy in Europe. Cultivation can provide
  predictable, quality controlled and relatively simple to harvest crop of
  seaweed. Seaweeds are typically grown on long tethers or nets. Growing
  seaweed requires high levels of nitrogen and other nutrients in the
  water. In Asia the waters are sometimes fertilized artificially
  @guiry_seaweed_1991, but this may not be viable at the scale required to
  grow seaweed as a fuel source. Some studies suggest seaweed cultivation
  and aquaculture as complimentary activities. The seaweed would benefit
  from the increased nitrogen levels due to fish farming. The scale of
  seaweed cultivation required to make an impact on energy demand is
  significant. *Hughes et al.* [7][7] estimate that an area
  5440km^2^ would need to be cultivated to provide 1% of the United
  Kingdom’s total energy demand. This is 3% of the UK’s total waters. If
  the same level of biogas was to be produced from land based crops, they
  estimate it would require 18% of the UK’s crop land. *Hughes et al.*
  consider that cultivation and anaerobic digestion of seaweed has real
  potential for isolated coastal and island communities, such as the Isle
  of Mull in Scotland [7][7].

  Costs
  =====

  The price of producing biogas from seaweed is difficult to determine. As
  there are no known digesters running solely on seaweed, it is impossible
  to get real world costs. *Chynoweth et al.* [2][2]
  estimated the cost of methane production from seaweed to be \$6-13 / GJ.
  This compares to \$6-8 / GJ for grasses and \$3-7 / GJ for wood.
  *McKennedy and Sherlock* [4][4] report a payback on
  investment time of 20 years. With natural gas prices currently low,
  anaerobic digestion is not viable option if economics are the main
  concern.

  Conclusion
  ==========

  The levels of biogas produced varies significantly between different
  studies. Anaerobic digestion is a complicated process and biogas output
  is dependant on many interconnected factors. However, most studies agree
  that anaerobic digestion of seaweed can generate significant quantities
  of biogas and compare favourably with land based crops. Seaweed can be
  co-digested with other substrates, often resulting in an increase in gas
  production. The technology, while currently underdeveloped, exists and
  there are no major technical hurdles to overcome.

  A huge advantage to biogas as a fuel is the ability to use it with
  existing technologies and infrastructure. It can be used directly in CHP
  systems or it can be upgraded to biomethane and used as a transport fuel
  and in national gas grids.

  Coastal and island communities with the relevant skills and resources
  could benefit from energy independence from biogas production from
  cultivated and harvested seaweeds. However, generating biogas from
  seaweed at country scale would require huge areas of coastal waters. At
  current natural gas prices, anaerobic digestion of seaweed is not
  economically viable for most areas.


  [1]: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.renene.2015.01.048
  [2]: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0960-1481(00)00019-7
  [3]: http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09593330.2013.765922
  [4]: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.07.101
  [5]: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2013.06.017
  [6]: http://www.epa.ie/pubs/reports/water/waterqua/wqr20102012/WQR_transitional_and_coastal.pdf
  [7]: http://dx.doi.org/10.1186/1754-6834-5-86
  [8]: http://www.worldcat.org/title/anaerobic-digestion-a-waste-treatment-technology/oclc/21561478