# Inkdrop

---
published: true
layout: post
slug: "inkdrop"
category: software
author: peter
---

I recently started using a new note taking app called [Inkdrop](https://www.inkdrop.info/).

Generally I try to avoid using proprietary software but this feels very different.
It's written by one guy, a chap in Japan called Takuya Matsuyama, and he's trying to make a living off developing it.

It's clearly written by a developer, for developers. The notes are written in Markdown and there is a really simple, clean interface. It syncs well between my computers and phone, and I find myself writing pretty much everything in it at the moment. I've even written this blog post with it.

One thing I don't like about it is there isn't a spell check installed. But thankfully it's possible to add a whole range of plugins, and spell check is one of them.
The plugin manager can usually be called by running `ipm` (inkdrop package manager) in a terminal, but for some reason this isn't available in Linux and you have to run the full path:

```
/usr/lib/inkdrop/resources/app/ipm/bin/ipm

```
So, to install the spell check, I run:

```
/usr/lib/inkdrop/resources/app/ipm/bin/ipm install spell-checker
```
and restart Inkdrop.

I quite like the spell checker because it underlines mis-spelled words, but doesn't give suggestions. Good practice to improve my spelling, without help! Unfortunately, only US spellings are available at the moment, but it looks like that will change soon.

I'm still working through a 60 day trial but pretty sure I'll be signing up as a customer.
